[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well, welcome to
this edition of Beyond Belief.
Mark Stavish is with us, the
founder and director of studies
at the Institute for
Hermetic Studies,
and the author of more than 20
books, Mark, on spirituality.
>>MARK STAVISH: That's right.
>>NOORY: It's amazing.
>>STAVISH: Well,
thank you very much.
>>NOORY: How often did
you pump a book out?
>>STAVISH: Well, it
seems like forever,
but, you know,
it's like anything.
Once you get going, traction
and momentum take over,
and you find you
have more to say.
>>NOORY: Mark, what
is hermetic studies?
>>STAVISH: Well, hermeticism is
what we think of as classical
and Renaissance spirituality
rooted in the teachings
of ancient Egypt.
>>NOORY: Not Hermes?
>>STAVISH: Hermes, yes.
Hermes Trismegistus.
>>NOORY: Now, what does it mean?
>>STAVISH: Well, it
involves the study of-- it's
really consciousness studies.
So you would study what they
did in the classical period
in the Renaissance, magic
or symbols, alchemy,
or the relationship of
mind and consciousness
to matter, astrology,
the study of cycles
and how they affect us, and
how we interact with them.
>>NOORY: Fantastic.
Pathology, spiritual pathology,
what would you say that is?
>>STAVISH: It is a
natural effect of,
or byproduct of our engagement
with spiritual practices.
We have to be honest, George.
No one comes to a
spiritual practice
because they're happy with
themselves or their lives.
They're something
they want to change.
>>NOORY: They're
missing something.
>>STAVISH: That's right,
and they want to find it.
Now, often, they want to
find it outside themselves,
and spirituality should push
us deeper into ourselves.
So, as we go deeper, we will
engage or come in contact
with those very
things within our self
which are keeping us from,
well, having the life we want
or having the
understandings we want.
>>NOORY: Do you help
them find this, Mark?
>>STAVISH: Well, the
teachings at the Institute
for Hermetic Studies do.
We have a course of study.
It's online, and we
have live programs
as well to help people traverse
this path from beginning
to end, to know themselves.
>>NOORY: How successful is it?
>>STAVISH: Well, that
depends on who you ask.
I think it's a very
individual thing.
And it takes place
gradually and over stages.
So it's not as if someone's
going to come in and become
instantly enlightened.
That's one of the
pathological ideas
that we encounter now
in spiritual practice,
that things are going to be fast
and easy and happen instantly.
>>NOORY: How do people recognize
the fact that they need help,
or they need some
change in their life?
>>STAVISH: I think they
recognize it early,
I think we all do.
But we have trouble
voicing it, and we don't
know where to go for help.
So, when we're feeling
physically ill,
it's kind of easy
to go to a doctor.
When we're feeling kind
of emotionally upset,
it may or may not be as
easy to go to a therapist.
But when you're
looking for something
of a spiritual nature,
it can be very confusing
because there's
so much out there.
There's so many
books, so many videos.
>>NOORY: So wide.
>>STAVISH: It's so wide.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: Do you have to be a
believer in God to be happy?
>>STAVISH: I don't believe so.
And I say that just so that
the viewers understand--
>>NOORY: There is a
however coming up here.
>>STAVISH: That's right
there is a however.
There's an aspect of what we
call metaphysical atheism,
and what that means
is we don't really
talk about or say for
certain whether there's
a creator deity like in
Christianity or Judaism
or Islam.
But we are open to
this idea that there's
vast spiritual forces out there.
So that's not not believing
in God, this form of atheism
shouldn't be confused
with materialism.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>STAVISH: You can't
be a materialist
and be on a
spiritual path there.
>>NOORY: Has technology helped
magnify spiritual problems
or fix them?
>>STAVISH: That's the
beauty of technology,
it magnifies everything.
So, while it's made it easier
for us to engage people, like
you and I to speak and come
together and with the audience,
it also has magnified
the problems
because people feel often more
isolated than ever before.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
Tell us a little bit about
the hermetic practitioner,
Bob Smith.
>>STAVISH: Bob
Smith was a fellow
that we had at a recent
Institute for Hermetic Studies
conference.
And his specialty
is the teachings
of Franz Bardon who is
a Czech hermeticist, who
wasn't terribly well known
outside of Czechoslovakia
or German-speaking countries
until like the '80s or '90s.
And, in the last few
years, interest in his work
has taken off considerably.
And Bob took the
teachings of Franz Bardon
and worked with what we
think of as the study
of the outer planets.
In astrology--
>>NOORY: That's fascinating.
>>STAVISH: Yeah.
And everyone knows we deal with
the moon, the sun, mercury,
and all of this--
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>STAVISH: --on a
day to day basis,
what we call the
classical seven planets.
We don't do a lot
with the outer three.
And what he did is
engaged in some kind
of visionary practices, what we
call psychic or astral travel,
mental travel, to
attempt to ascertain what
goes on in those dimensions.
>>NOORY: Let's take a look
at some of his work, Mark.
>>BOB SMITH: It turns
out this generates
quite a bit of mental and oddly
some astral energy, which is
normally generated by breath.
And since you're using
empowered crystal for that,
that's a little weird.
I'm not sure where that's going.
Basically, it's designed
for manifestation.
And this is a production
version of one of four stages.
The initial stage
device, pretty safe.
Worst case, if you
work with it, you
might get a bad state
at the end of the day.
The stage 2 device is
powered by Tesla coil.
Sorry, stage 3 device is
And it left me with surface
burns on three fingers.
Not sure yet how to
dummy proof that item.
So people don't blind
themselves or cause
themselves other degrees of
harm, but it seems to work.
Have given these
devices to a number
of senior qigong
practitioners, half of them
don't feel a thing initially,
which is kind of weird.
If they play with it for about
an hour a day for about a week,
that sensory apparatus
seems to turn on with them,
and they like it.
I've given it to a couple of
high-end remote work people who
work for various governments.
Same number 50/50, half of
them loved the damn thing
and got really good
results from it.
The other half, got bunkers.
So I don't think it's
the power of suggestion.
I think there's
something true there.
But our ability to measure
whatever it's producing
doesn't seem to be very--
>>NOORY: He seemed
to imply, Mark,
that technology may
have backfired on him
and hurt him a little bit.
Did you pick that up?
>>STAVISH: Yes, definitely.
And this is not the
first time when we've
heard of something like this.
A lot of the notion of
interacting with technology
for various psychic phenomena
or healing practices,
we find because of--
one, is we don't have
a lot of information
on it, so we really
are flying blind.
So, as we experiment
with it and trying
to find out from what
I'm hearing from people
are doing is, again, it
doesn't have the same controls.
Half the people had effects.
The other half had nothing.
And then, of course,
those who do have it,
is it going to be positive,
or is it going to be negative?
And in his case, of course,
he said second-degree burns
on two fingers of his hand.
>>NOORY: That's not good.
>>STAVISH: That's not.
So, when we look at
amplifying the energy
load of an undertaking,
a psychic or metaphysical
undertaking, we have to realize
that our nervous system may not
be up to that task.
>>NOORY: What can you tell
us about Rudolf Steiner?
>>STAVISH: Well, Steiner was
an Austrian metaphysician.
He was an author.
He wrote many books,
small monographs.
He was quite popular
in the early years
of the 20th century, and now,
he seemed to have had a revival.
And he founded an organization
known as the Anthroposophical
Society, and it was a breakaway
group from the Theosophical
Society.
Most of his work is based
on his own visionary
or psychic experiences.
I find it at times difficult
to understand, however,
only because of the
language of the time.
>>NOORY: Was he
good at what he did?
>>STAVISH: I
believe he was good,
and I believe he is worth study.
And that was how I
was going to qualify
it is that, if you
spend some time with it,
you'll find that he
does have a great deal
to offer in terms of insights.
And some of his writings are
particularly relevant to today,
and they saw a bit of revival
over the last three years,
in terms of what is the impact
of technology on society.
And are we deadening ourselves,
in many ways, from the ability
to even have--
>>NOORY: We might be.
>>STAVISH: --psychic
experiences.
>>NOORY: We might be.
And its cognitive
capacity, what is that?
Because that seems to be waning.
>>STAVISH: Well, it's just,
really, the ability to think.
One of the things that I--
>>NOORY: Is it on the decline?
>>STAVISH: I
definitely believe so,
and I think there are studies
out there that show it.
>>NOORY: Why?
>>STAVISH: In short,
maybe too much media
time, too much screen time.
The focusing of our
minds, particularly
on handheld devices and
screens in front of us,
focuses our mind
in a particular way
that studies have
shown rewire our brain.
It changes the way we perceive
ourselves, perceive others,
and then the way we think.
>>NOORY: You go to the airport
and look at people sitting,
waiting for a
flight, 90% of them
are on their smartphones,
90% of them, maybe more.
>>STAVISH: I did that when I
was sitting there in Chicago
waiting for my connection.
I looked around,
and I counted off
how many people were
on their screens
and how many were reading books.
Remember, there was a time--
>>NOORY: People
would bring books.
>>STAVISH: Yeah.
>>NOORY: What happened
to those days?
>>STAVISH: Well, let's
try and bring them back.
>>NOORY: Yeah, but
what happened to them?
>>STAVISH: I think it's ease.
It's easy to pull out your
phone and look at the screen.
And, in that ease,
it's easy to fall
into just the habit of
always checking your status,
always checking.
>>NOORY: It is convenient.
>>STAVISH: Very much so.
>>NOORY: I mean, if I want
to know who Mark Stavish is,
you just Google
him, and it pops up.
Now, 15, 20 years ago,
we couldn't do that.
>>STAVISH: Well, again,
everything is a--
we have to weigh it out.
And when we look at technology
or even spiritual practices,
we have to assess, over time
from our engagement with them,
is this helping me?
Is this hindering me?
Is this the right amount,
or is it too much?
>>NOORY: Is it dangerous?
>>STAVISH: The technology?
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>STAVISH: I think
definitely so,
and not the technology itself,
but how we're engaging with it.
And I believe it's the same with
a lot of spiritual practice.
Most of the practices in and
of themselves aren't dangerous,
it's how people
engage with them.
And that needs to be very clear.
So it's almost too
much of a good thing
turns a virtue into a vice.
>>NOORY: How would you
weigh the possible dangers
of paranormal research?
Could that be a problem?
>>STAVISH: One of the things
that I found out over the years
is that people want
a new experience.
And they want to experience
the invisible, that
which is not of their physical
experience, their day to day.
And they will engage
in paranormal research
or what passes for
it, particularly ghost
hunting and that type of thing.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>STAVISH: And they do
it without any really
understanding what they
may be encountering.
>>NOORY: They're
doing it for fun.
>>STAVISH: For fun.
And that's where the
problem comes in.
>>NOORY: Can it backfire?
>>STAVISH: Definitely.
>>NOORY: How so?
>>STAVISH: Well, you
look at what goes on
in many of the shows
or many of the reports,
and people will attempt
to go find a ghost.
Now, why does a ghost happen?
If we look at the
classical literature,
if we look at
traditional studies,
it's usually a person
or a group of people,
but a person who has
unresolved emotional issues.
So, in short, they're
probably angry.
There's something that
they're not happy about,
and they're sticking
around for whatever reason.
>>NOORY: For whatever reason.
>>STAVISH: So,
now, ask yourself,
would you want to
engage with this person
when they were alive?
>>NOORY: Probably not.
>>STAVISH: So why do you
want to engage with them now
when they're dead?
>>NOORY: It's even worse.
>>STAVISH: That's right, because
you don't know what they can
or cannot do to you.
You don't have the background
to protect yourself
from their aggression.
>>NOORY: What should we do?
Back off?
>>STAVISH: I think that
we should encourage
responsible studies,
and that would
be by linking
paranormal research,
even if it's unofficial.
It doesn't have to be
the big corporate stuff
or the government stuff
or stuff that's done
in academia but as individuals.
Make sure that our
paranormal research
is done within the framework
of some traditional spiritual
practices, where they
have a place for it.
>>NOORY: Stanley Zurek.
Tell us about him.
>>STAVISH: Stan is a great guy.
And he's done a lot of research
in Northeastern Pennsylvania
on a phenomenon known as Suscon.
And every place--
>>NOORY: He's a
paranormal author, right?
>>STAVISH: That's right.
He's a paranormal author.
And every area in the
country or the world
has some place
like Suscon, where
strange phenomena take place.
And, over time, it
builds into legend,
and he wanted to take
a look at that and say,
is there any truth to it?
And he collected these legends.
He did his own research.
He tells us what the stories
are of the locations, what
is said to have happened there.
You can even find it
with GPS, and that's it.
He is a fellow who
tells you where
to go if you want to test
the legend of Suscon.
>>NOORY: One of his
stories has to do
with a ghost with a flashlight
and a phenomenon known
as residual haunting.
>>STANLEY ZUREK: You
walk up to the woods,
they go in with a flashlight.
They're looking around
the woods, the flashlight,
a couple of times, and somebody
flashlight's back at you.
Sometimes you might see
this girl moving around
in the woods.
Sometimes you might
hear somebody yell,
"Please help me."
OK.
Just a little
area, and this area
is maybe 200 yards big
now, that's about it.
Not a big area right
now because it's getting
developed up there.
But this girl is
screaming for help,
someone come get
her and help her.
Now a lot of people say,
spirits, ghosts, right?
This might be a residual.
If you're not sure
what a residual is,
it's like a tape recorded over
and over and over again, not
a true haunting.
A true haunting means you're
going to have interaction
with something.
Residual means like--
I'll use Gettysburg
as an example.
You go to Gettysburg, the
soldiers are still fighting.
If you're lucky enough
when you're down there,
you might just catch the
soldiers coming out fighting.
You might go there next year
soldiers come out fighting
basically the same area.
They do the same thing over
and over and over again.
Not a true haunting,
it's called residual.
True haunting would be, if
they're walking down the street
and they look at you and
they say, "How you doing?"
That means they interact
with you, right,
which some people claim
that's what happened down
in Gettysburg.
>>NOORY: How did he
get all these stories?
>>STAVISH: Well,
he's a local guy.
He lives out there, he heard
them growing up as a child.
>>NOORY: They're great stories.
>>STAVISH: They're fantastic.
And guys like Stan are
really the heartbeat
of good folklore, of
good anthropology,
of good psychic research.
>>NOORY: And you could tell
he enjoys what he's doing.
>>STAVISH: He loves it.
And, once he gets rolling,
he's just great to listen to.
>>NOORY: What, Mark, is called
the trickster phenomenon?
>>STAVISH: The trickster
phenomena is a experience
that many people have.
And the best way to describe
it is, well, the gods
are scoundrels.
>>NOORY: Not all gods.
>>STAVISH: Yeah.
It's like, what is it that
seems to go wrong or go sideways
in different types
of psychic research?
And can you trust
the information
you get from the invisible?
>>NOORY: Can you?
>>STAVISH: Well, as
Ronald Reagan said,
"trust but verify."
>>NOORY: Yeah, exactly.
>>STAVISH: You got to have
a grain of alchemical salt
with almost everything that
comes from the invisible.
And history tends
to bear this out,
particularly if
you see those who
engage in on a regular basis.
And George Hansen wrote a
book called, The Trickster
and the Paranormal, which should
be required reading for anyone
engaging in this stuff
because he shows how
regular engagement in
the invisible, pulling
the psychic dimensions
regularly into our lives
can cause a high
degree of disruption.
>>NOORY: In your life?
>>STAVISH: In your life.
>>NOORY: That's interesting.
Now there's also a phenomena
called the phenomena buddy.
What is that?
>>STAVISH: Phenomena
buddy is someone
who helps keep you sane.
This is someone--
>>NOORY: Does everybody
should have one?
>>STAVISH: At least one.
And this is you become
like the people you
spend most of your time with.
And you want to spend your
time with people, particularly
if you're engaging in
spiritual practices
or paranormal research
even, that have
a good head on their shoulders.
And they're going to help you
question your understanding
of an experience.
And it's sort of
like my great uncle
used to say when I was a kid.
I remember him saying referring
back to the '20s and '30s,
he said, "well, spiritualism
was all the rage."
>>NOORY: The good old days.
>>STAVISH: The good old days.
It's all the rage.
And he said one of
the problems was
a truck goes down the street,
it rattles the chandelier.
You know people had
chandeliers then.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>STAVISH: And
the person thinks,
"This is the masters,"
the great adept trying
to communicate to them.
>>NOORY: They're
communicating with us.
>>STAVISH: That's right.
And, no, they're not, it's a
truck going down the street.
And that's part
of the pathology.
It's easy to begin to look at
every encounter in your life
as having deep meaning,
and it probably doesn't.
So it's learning to
perceive reality as it is.
And your phenomena
buddy is someone
who kind of has a mental
rope around you to keep you
from going off the edge.
>>NOORY: Do they ground you?
>>STAVISH: They help ground you.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: What if you have
a phenomena buddy who
is not grounded himself?
>>STAVISH: Then
you're in trouble.
>>NOORY: That
happens, doesn't it?
>>STAVISH: I think more
often than not because people
are going into a metaphysical
group, psychic research
group, spiritual
practice, they may not
have a lot of
experience themselves
or a good background.
And, well, birds of a
feather flock together,
so it's easier to
find someone who is
ungrounded than it is grounded.
So you just have to pick
your fellow practitioners
very carefully.
>>NOORY: What do you think of
the UFO phenomena these days?
>>STAVISH: I think it's
really pretty stunning
because, on one hand, I
can't tell you what it is,
whether it's extraterrestrial.
I mean I have my own views that
it's probably interdimensional.
>>NOORY: A lot of
people think that.
>>STAVISH: I think
that's probably
a safer bet just
based on what it would
take to travel through space.
>>NOORY: But I think,
over the years,
they've developed a way
to bend space and time.
That's my take.
>>STAVISH: And that
very well may be.
What I find
interesting, though, is
that, if we take the
headlines that we've
seen over the last
three years, we
can go and find
almost exact headlines
from 30, 40, and 50 years ago.
And there really hasn't
been a lot of revelation.
I mean, there really hasn't.
We haven't had anyone
come out and point
to this craft and
these materials
that have supposed to
have been collected
and say, "This is it."
We hear about it, but
we're not being shown--
>>NOORY: It.
>>STAVISH: --the
thing itself, the it,
that which will clinch the deal.
>>NOORY: Maybe they don't
have it, maybe they do.
>>STAVISH: I think the
way it's being approached
is, as Jacques Vallee said it
is a social control mechanism.
>>NOORY: He might be right.
He might be right.
What about mindfulness?
How does that work into this?
>>STAVISH: Mindfulness
is a term that
has become very popular
over the last decade or so.
And it simply means paying
attention to what you're doing,
be aware of what you're
doing, of your environment,
and of what's going on.
And even your reaction, that's
the other part of mindfulness,
being aware of your responses
and your reactions to things.
And our reaction would be
something which is habituated.
It's very quick.
It's a habit.
A response is something where
we take a little more time
and think about it.
But pay attention so that you
can begin to know yourself
through these
experiences and know
your relationship to
the inner and the outer,
the as above so below.
Mindfulness, that
paying attention,
that is the basis of it all.
>>NOORY: What would
you say, Mark,
is probably the most
compelling aspect of your work
that you would love the
public to understand?
>>STAVISH: That you are
responsible for your own life
and your own
direction, and that you
can come to know and
understand yourself.
And, in that, understand
that any spiritual practice
you undertake should be
good for you in this life.
It should have some positive
benefit for you in this life.
And it should also
have a benefit for you
in the hereafter,
whatever that may be.
>>NOORY: Whatever that may be.
>>STAVISH: Yes, because
different schools of thought
have different ideas.
Some believe in a
variety of heavens.
Some believe in reincarnation.
Some believe in both.
But the practices
which you undertake,
you need to know that they're
going to be of value to you
in the long run.
>>NOORY: How did you get
to where you are today?
Thinking the way you think?
20-plus books,
that's magnificent.
How did you get there?
>>STAVISH: I've
always had an interest
in the spiritual dimension.
And, as I mentioned
earlier, my great uncle,
I grew up around people who
were deeply involved in this.
He was involved with many
of the esoteric movements
of the early 20th
century and even earlier.
So I've always been
around it, and I've
always been very fortunate to
be around people with good heads
on their shoulders
and, through that,
exposed to people who practiced
very traditional teachings.
>>NOORY: When somebody comes
to you for help and assistance,
what do they want to learn?
What do they want?
>>STAVISH: Well, when
they want assistance,
they usually want a
solution to a problem.
And, very often, even when we
say, what do want to learn,
they don't really
want to learn much.
What they want is a
solution to a problem.
And we'll take a look
at what that problem,
maybe it's usually
something very common,
and try to point them
in a direction that's
going to be more inward.
That you have to come
to know who you are,
how this problem came to be,
what your responsibilities are,
and what you need to do to
change yourself for the better.
>>NOORY: Is it changeable?
>>STAVISH: I think
most things are.
And I think, well,
everything over time
is, it's just a matter
of whether people
are willing to put the
time and the effort in.
>>NOORY: How do we make
ourselves equal to God?
What does that mean?
>>STAVISH: That's taken
from the Corpus Hermeticum.
And what it means is to get
rid of all of our limited self
concepts, to open yourself
up to all the possibilities
that were within us.
We hear that in a
variety of teachings
over and over and
over again, that we
are made in the image of God, or
that we are gods in miniature,
something to this effect.
And the only way
we begin to realize
that is to think of
what we are and what
we are capable of,
even in potential,
rather than what we are not
or what we see ourselves
not being.
>>NOORY: Now, here's
a great question.
What are the mind parasites?
>>STAVISH: Oh, that's
a great phrase.
And it's from a book
written by Colin Wilson.
And if you haven't read any
of Colin Wilson's works,
you've got to get to a
library and read some.
He's a great writer
>>NOORY: Of mind parasites.
>>STAVISH: And he wrote a book
called The Mind Parasites.
It's a short novel,
and it has to do
with this idea, which is really
relevant to our time now.
Of course, we
believe that there's
a variety of visible
and invisible forces.
Some of them we think are
helpful to us, some of them--
>>NOORY: Some not.
>>STAVISH: --we think not so.
The parasites are the ones
that aren't so helpful to us.
>>NOORY: They attach.
>>STAVISH: That's
right, like a parasite.
>>NOORY: Leeches.
>>STAVISH: Now these parasites,
to have an influence,
don't have to influence
or control everybody,
they just have to influence
or control the right person.
So the mind parasite is
that force of, we'll say,
negation or destruction
that's going to say,
I want to create
the most disruption
in this neighborhood.
Who can it be?
Well, it could be
the local clergyman.
It could be the local teacher.
It could be a businessman.
I want to create the most
disruption in this community,
who could it be?
Could be the mayor.
And it works its way up.
So the more influence you
have on others, in business,
in religion, in politics,
and media, in some respects,
the more open you are to being a
target of these mind parasites.
Now I just want to say the
opposite is true as well.
The greater potential you
have for those things which
want to help us as
well, help us and grow.
>>NOORY: There's a lot
of talk these days, Mark,
about artificial intelligence,
that it could destroy humanity.
Are you a believer in that?
>>STAVISH: Well, if you had
asked me this question a month
ago, the answer I
would have given
you would be very
different from the one
I'm going to give you now.
>>NOORY: What made that change?
>>STAVISH: It was
just some articles
that friends had sent me
before I came the other day.
And I read them, and
it's just the speed
with which artificial
intelligence is developing.
I asked some questions
about myself and people
I knew a month ago, and most
of the answers were wrong.
It was inaccurate.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>STAVISH: Mm-hmm.
the one search said,
I didn't even exist,
but then it learned.
In a few minutes later,
I came into being
for artificial intelligence.
>>NOORY: That you were here.
>>STAVISH: I was here.
So artificial intelligence
is problematic
because it only can tell
us what it has access to.
Now that means it can be
very beneficial for answering
basic questions
about basic ideas.
But from what I understand,
it's learning very quickly.
>>NOORY: On its own.
>>STAVISH: And from
what I understand,
even people involved in
it don't really understand
how that process is happening.
>>NOORY: Does it scare them?
>>STAVISH: It appears to, but
they don't seem scared enough
to want to stop the experiment.
>>NOORY: They can't
stop, it's like a fix.
>>STAVISH: I believe so.
>>NOORY: They want to see
how far they can take it.
>>STAVISH: How far will it go?
And that's the part that, I
wouldn't say it worries me,
but it is a concern
because, what
is the spread and reach of
this artificial intelligence?
I don't know enough
about technology.
And if the folks involved in it
tell me they're afraid of it--
and I've had a few, some really
smart PhD-level computer people
tell me they're really
concerned about it.
>>NOORY: Right.
Jobs and everything else, right?
>>STAVISH: And people I
know personally, they've
said this frightens them.
>>NOORY: CEO of a company
just recently laid
off 90% of his staff
because he said
automation has replaced you.
90%.
>>STAVISH: And then
what do they do?
What happens to these 90--
>>NOORY: Where do they go?
>>STAVISH: Where do they go?
What do they do?
That's the big question.
So if we make people
disposable, we
run putting ourselves in
a very dangerous track.
>>NOORY: I mean, you've heard
this talk of driverless trucks.
Do you want to be in front
of a driverless truck
in the dead of winter with
snow all over the place?
I don't.
>>STAVISH: No.
>>NOORY: I want a truck
driver who's got experience
and knows what
he's doing, or she.
>>STAVISH: Exactly.
>>NOORY: That's where
it goes too far.
>>STAVISH: We're
trying to make people,
not only interchangeable,
but now replaceable.
And this is the problem with
artificial intelligence,
that within the spiritual
dimension, we see--
in Japan, there's
occasional robots
that will take on
the role of a priest.
>>NOORY: Or a spouse.
>>STAVISH: Or spouse, yeah.
Or spouse, that's even stranger.
The priest is
interesting because you
can ask your questions.
And, of course, if it has
the right information,
it can give you basic answers.
But that's not the
same as an experience.
I can't rely on
that robot priest
to be able to help me
with my experiences
because it hasn't
experienced the path.
It's not sentient.
>>NOORY: That's a good point.
How can we learn from
artificial intelligence
and not be afraid of it?
>>STAVISH: I think we need
to simply keep it simple.
We need to realize that it has
limits and not to rely on it.
As we see within weeks,
and I mean two weeks here,
when AI seem to break into--
>>NOORY: Explode.
>>STAVISH: --explode
into the headlines.
We saw on teaching platforms--
because my wife is a teacher--
of instructors, how can we use
AI to write our lesson plans?
Now I understand that
you want a little help,
but you have to be the
master of your subject.
And this is what we're seeing--
>>NOORY: You have to
be the driving force.
>>STAVISH: The
driving force, yes.
And you need to have mastery
of the subject matter
to be the driving force.
What we're seeing is, whether
it's with excessive screen time
or ease of accessibility,
now the notion
that I really don't
have to know anything,
I just have to ask the
question and something
will tell me something.
>>NOORY: It'll tell
me, and just let it be.
>>STAVISH: Mm-hmm
>>NOORY: That's scary though.
>>STAVISH: Right,
because what we
see with it is a decline
in cognitive ability,
in the ability to solve
problems, well, recognize
problems as well, and in the
ability to engage in practice.
>>NOORY: Will AI
ever get to the point
where it'll understand
spirituality?
>>STAVISH: That I
can't answer because I
don't know about the cognition.
That is what they call
that unification, where
it becomes self-aware.
That I don't know
if it's possible.
There are some
theories, and again, I
place this as theories,
that that may be possible,
but it really wouldn't be
the AI becoming self-aware.
It would be the
technology being hijacked,
basically possessed by some
invisible force or entity.
>>NOORY: Are you
afraid of robots?
>>STAVISH: No, I'm just afraid
of what people do with them.
>>NOORY: There was
a Twilight Zone
episode called, I Sing the
Body Electric by Ray Bradbury,
he wrote it.
I did an editorial about it, and
he sent me a great letter years
ago.
I got it on my
bulletin board at work.
But it was about a family
who lost their mother, two
little kids, father.
She died, and they were
despondent and rightfully so.
And the father said, "We're
going to get a nanny for you,"
and they went to the robot
store and just bought one.
And the nanny raised the kids.
They became adults, and it
ended with the nanny going
to another family of two
little youngsters, where
the adults hugged her and
kissed her and said goodbye,
and life went on.
Do you think it'll
ever be that way?
>>STAVISH: I think
it's possible.
Whether it's desirable
or not is another story,
but I do think it's possible.
And from what I have heard
from people who work there
and from what I have
read, there seems
to be a large group of people
in what we call Silicon
Valley, who are quite obsessed.
>>NOORY: They're
vehement with this stuff.
>>STAVISH: With not only
technology, but also
the ability to
transfer consciousness
into technology, which is
another questionable idea
altogether.
But the fact is they
believe it, and I
think that's what's important.
When we get into these ideas,
it's not whether we believe it
or not, is that someone else
may or someone else does.
>>NOORY: Well, have you seen
some of the physical attributes
of these robots?
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>NOORY: They're scary-looking.
They blink, they turn
their head, they listen.
They open their eyes up
like that, it's weird.
>>STAVISH: Yes,
and I watched one
about two or three days ago.
What I find fascinating about
it is it really very much
is a kind of seduction.
That is the robot
is being designed
to be as lifelike as possible
so that we forget that it is not
human, so that we don't
even recognize that anymore.
>>NOORY: Right.
What do you recommend to
people who want to learn more
about what you do?
>>STAVISH: Best
thing for them to do
is to just Google
me or go to Amazon,
look up some of our work,
our books under Mark Stavish.
>>NOORY: S-T-A-V-I-S-H.
>>STAVISH: Correct.
Or they can go to the Institute
for Hermetic Studies website.
They also can find us, we have
a lot of courses on Teachable.
And my email will
pop up in any search.
Just please feel
free to contact me.
>>NOORY: If you had
to talk about an area
that you haven't tackled
yet in your career
but you would like to,
what would that be?
>>STAVISH: Oh, there's so many.
I think that getting
folks to really understand
the necessity of taking their
spiritual practice seriously
without it impacting
negatively on a heavy way
in their daily life
and recognizing
that their purpose
of these practices
is to become self-aware.
>>NOORY: How many people
aren't spiritual, Mark?
>>STAVISH: I think that,
when we look at the numbers,
it probably doesn't
change a lot.
There's probably
1% or a fraction
of a percent that are
involved in what we would call
very significant practices.
There's probably
another 4% or 5%
that are involved in tangential,
and then we see probably 30%
to 40% or 50% that are
involved in what we think of as
mainstream religious practices.
Probably one of the greatest
problems we face right
now is the spiritual but
not religious category.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>STAVISH: And the
reason I say that is
because, without any guidelines
that traditional practice
brings, you don't have
any way of vetting
the source of your information.
Where does this come from?
How do I do it?
What can I expect
from the practices?
And who are the
examples you give
of maybe not 100%
successful but at least
where I can see
the path of success
is happening that's unfolding?
>>NOORY: Do you have to
believe in God to be spiritual?
>>STAVISH: No, but
it probably helps.
You have to--
>>NOORY: How so?
>>STAVISH: Well, many people
have trouble with the Buddhist
view of what we call
metaphysical atheism,
where you're open to
these possibilities,
but you don't really have a
creator-deity that you look to.
So, if you can't handle
that kind of ambiguity,
it's really very good to believe
that there is a focal point
or force of
intelligence out there
and power, which they're
inseparable at that point, that
has somehow initiated a process
that has brought all of this
into being of which we are a
part of because that keeps us
humble.
>>NOORY: You'd be
a good teacher.
>>STAVISH: Thank you very much.
>>NOORY: And what
is psychic obesity?
>>STAVISH: That's what
we all go through.
It's when we get
started on the journey,
and we go to the
bookstore or the library,
if you were the kind of
person who went to the library
in the day, or now you go to
YouTube or TikTok or something.
And you just start consuming
all this information.
>>NOORY: Whatever it is.
>>STAVISH: Whatever it is,
like going to the buffet,
and you're taking a little bit
of everything trying to figure
out what it is you like.
And, at some point,
you have to-- you
try everything it's
really good, but you
have to start using some
discrimination in your diet
now.
And it really is a diet,
it's what we consume.
And we have to say, OK,
this is fun, I enjoy it,
but maybe I need to
do it in smaller doses
because this is good
for me, and this is what
I need to spend some time on.
>>NOORY: If you had
your ability to tap
into one aspect of everything
we've talked about today,
what would that be?
>>STAVISH: Tapping completely
and have perfect knowledge of?
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>STAVISH: It would be--
>>NOORY: Handed to you.
>>STAVISH: --handed to me.
It would be the complete
knowledge of the path of birth
and rebirth experientially
on every step of the way.
>>NOORY: Explain that.
>>STAVISH: We hear so
much about reincarnation,
but we often get
conflicting views.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>STAVISH: A lot of people are
very familiar with the Tibetan
teachings from the Tibetan
Book of the Dead and various--
>>NOORY: Egyptian
Book of the Dead.
>>STAVISH: Right.
Exploitations have gone on.
Then we have the Egyptian
Book of the Dead.
We have all of these things.
It would be great to just
have that full understanding
of the journey back and
forth experientially.
But I understand,
for someone who's
had that, that's what
we call enlightenment.
>>NOORY: So it works.
>>STAVISH: So what I'm
asking for is enlightenment.
>>NOORY: It works.
Of your 20-some books,
which one is your favorite?
>>STAVISH: That's
a tough question,
but I think for
now my favorite is
the one we talked
about I believe
on the last show, Egregores,
the Occult Entities
That Watch Over Human Destiny,
and I'll tell you why.
I had a great conversation
about this book
with Joscelyn Godwin
before I wrote it.
And I just said
off the cuff, "You
know I'm thinking about writing
this book," and he said, "Well,
that's a great idea."
And I went home.
I mean I had some
notes set aside for it.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>STAVISH: But I just went
home, and I started writing it.
And it just flowed.
It was as if you and
I were sitting here
talking about the topic, and
we recorded and transcribed it.
>>NOORY: Just like
we're doing now.
>>STAVISH: Just like now.
So the fact that
it came so easily,
it's been such a great
benefit to people.
It's been translated
into so many languages.
I think I'll say that's
my favorite one for now.
>>NOORY: So what would you
recommend to people, Mark,
who want to change their life
and they just don't know how?
>>STAVISH: You have to
start somewhere and start
with the small things.
Take responsibility
for the small things.
When people say they want
to change their lives,
they want big things to
happen quickly and stay,
and rarely does that happen.
It is very difficult
for people to understand
and to accept that,
yes, believe it or not,
making your bed first
thing in the morning
is beneficial to your life.
It's no small thing.
Cleaning the dishes
and putting them away
is no small thing because those
small actions of exactness--
>>NOORY: They all add up.
>>STAVISH: --they all add up.
>>NOORY: Mark, thanks for
being on Beyond Belief.
>>STAVISH: Thanks.
It was great being here.
>>NOORY: Learned a lot from you.
>>STAVISH: Well, and I always
learn a lot from you as well.
>>NOORY: It's fascinating.
Change your life,
and it'll change you.
Thanks for watching
Beyond Belief.
[THEME MUSIC]